#URL, DESCRIPTION.

http://3fnhfsfc2bpzdste.onion,Onionweb filehosting
http://ow24et3tetp6tvmk.onion,OnionWallet
http://mailtoralnhyol5v.onion,MailTOR
http://dppmfxaacucguzpc.onion,TorDir
http://torlinkbgs6aabns.onion,TorLinks
http://3g2upl4pq6kufc4m.onion,DuckDuckGo
http://zqktlwi4fecvo6ri.onion,TheHiddenWiki
http://p3lr4cdm3pv4plyj.onion,expecting you
http://kbhpodhnfxl3clb4.onion,TorSearch
http://xfmro77i3lixucja.onion,Imperial Library
http://4zeottxi5qmnnjhd.onion,The Anarchism Library
http://c3jemx2ube5v5zpg.onion,Jotunbane Reading Club
http://honeynetvg7i4lc6.onion,HoneyNet
http://torsafeiwttlkul6.onion,TorSafe
http://honeynetvg7i4lc6.onion,HoneyNet
http://pyl7a4ccwgpxm6rd.onion,CodeGreen
http://wzrtr6gpencksu3d.onion,GitHubParadise
http://torbookdjwhjnju4.onion,TorBook
http://dirnxxdraygbifgc.onion,OnionDir
http://imgbifwwqoixh7te.onion,ImgBi
http://wuvdsbmbwyjzsgei.onion,HFS
http://sms4tor3vcr2geip.onion,SMS For TOR
http://ad52wtwp2goynr3a.onion,Dark like my soul
http://zw3crggtadila2sg.onion,TorChan
http://burninetliliito5.onion,Quema tu movil
http://s6cco2jylmxqcdeh.onion,CebollaChan
http://32rfckwuorlf4dlv.onion,OnionURL Repository
http://torwikignoueupfm.onion,TorWiki
http://wiki5kauuihowqi5.onion,OnionWiki
http://kpynyvym6xqi7wz2.onion,Parazite
http://jh32yv5zgayyyts3.onion,Hidden Wiki Onion Urls
http://allyour4nert7pkh.onion,its happening
http://torbroker2ulwffg.onion,TorBroker
http://fogcore5n3ov3tui.onion,BitcoinFog
http://samsgdtwz6hvjyu4.onion,SafeCrow
http://easycoinsayj7p5l.onion,EasyCoin
http://jzn5w5pac26sqef4.onion,WeBuyBitcoins
http://3dbr5t4pygahedms.onion,ccPal Store
http://y3fpieiezy2sin4a.onion,HQER
http://qkj4drtgvpm7eecl.onion,CounterFeit
http://tuu66yxvrnn3of7l.onion,UK Guns
http://hbetshipq5yhhrsd.onion,Hidden BetCoin
http://cstoreav7i44h2lr.onion,CStore
http://tfwdi3izigxllure.onion,Apples4Bitcoin
http://jvrnuue4bvbftiby.onion,Data-Bay
http://bgkitnugq5ef2cpi.onion,Hackingtosh
http://ybp4oezfhk24hxmb.onion,Hitman Network
http://mobil7rab6nuf7vx.onion,Movile Store
http://yth5q7zdmqlycbcz.onion,Old Man Fixers Fixing Services
http://qizriixqwmeq4p5b.onion,TorWeb Developer
http://vfqnd6mieccqyiit.onion,UK Passports
http://en35tuzqmn4lofbk.onion,US Fake store
http://xfnwyig7olypdq5r.onion,USA Citizen
http://uybu3melulmoljnd.onion,iLike help guy
http://rso4hutlefirefqp.onion,EuCanna Cannabis
http://newpdsuslmzqazvr.onion,Peoples drug store
http://smoker32pk4qt3mx.onion,Smokeables
http://fzqnrlcvhkgbdwx5.onion,CannabisUK
http://kbvbh4kdddiha2ht.onion,DeDope
http://s5q54hfww56ov2xc.onion,BitPharma
http://ll6lardicrvrljvq.onion,Brainmagic
http://25ffhnaechrbzwf3.onion,NLGrovees
http://k4btcoezc5tlxyaf.onion,Kamagra Tablets
http://74ypjqjwf6oejmax.onion,Bneathvt
http://76qugh5bey5gum7l.onion,DeepWebRadio
http://tns7i5gucaaussz4.onion,FreeFor
http://edramalpl7oq5npk.onion,Encyclopedia Dramatica
http://jv7aqstbyhd5hqki.onion,HackBB
http://hbjw7wjeoltskhol.onion,Galaxy
http://bitmailendavkbec.onion,BitMessage
http://torbox3uiot6wchz.onion,TorBox
http://wi7qkxyrdpu5cmvr.onion,Autistici
http://6sgjmi53igmg7fm7.onion,Buggedplanet
http://2r2tz6wzqh7gaji7.onion,kavkaz center
http://rrcc5uuudhh4oz3c.onion,Intel Exchange
http://opnju4nyz7wbypme.onion,Eliza Chatbot
http://zbnnr7qzaxlk5tms.onion,Wiki Leaks
http://2ogmrlfzdthnwkez.onion,Rent a Hacker
http://am4wuhz3zifexz5u.onion,TOR Library
http://uj3wazyk5u4hnvtk.onion,The Pirate Bay
http://doxbinzqkeoso6sl.onion,DOXBIN Personal Information
http://lolicore75rq3tm5.onion,Lolicore Downloads
http://vt27twhtksyvjrky.onion,lol 20th Century Western Music Recordings and Scores
http://k4jmdeccpnsfe43c.onion,Girls Released Model pics
http://54dgeda4ik6iypui.onion,Gallery FTVX
http://pinkmethuylnenlz.onion,The Pink Meth
http://mmgh3rqeswrlgzdr.onion,VOR-COM
http://germanyhusicaysx.onion,Deutschland im Deep Web German forum
http://runionv62ul3roit.onion,Russian Onion Union
http://amberoadychffmyw.onion,Amberoad Mercado Ruso
http://r2d2akbw3jpt4zbf.onion,R2D2 Mercado Ruso
http://ramp2bombkadwvgz.onion,R2D2 Mercado Ruso Drogas
http://xzzpowtjlobho6kd.onion,DeepBlog
http://zqiirytam276uogb.onion,Thorlauta
http://ocbh4hoqs37unvv6.onion,French Deep Web
http://23tjl3xpt5btiqms.onion,W38M411
http://y5fmhyqdr6r7ddws.onion,Anarplex
http://2jv5r7k66ralyk3g.onion,Money washing
http://2kka4f23pcxgqkpv.onion,Euro guns
http://2oztyiaxrr3vijwe.onion,Cythosia
http://2pdkdy3eo552mpiz.onion,ZeroBin
http://nad32rsmfweeiva4.onion,A hidden service 0 Hello world
http://ca4xqmveiuzh3bnl.onion,A hidden service 1
http://ieh7jxzhptdhfxbg.onion,A hidden service 2
http://vtduisq4g6heuzom.onion,A hidden service 3
http://vh5xn7hvg22k4m7v.onion,A hidden service 4
http://3sudsrkveht5atqj.onion,A hidden service 5
http://2qtnwm3zdbn52nxt.onion,A hidden service 6
http://kck7yishscjzkf2w.onion,A hidden service 7
http://7cq7n4phwjp4yq4f.onion,A hidden service 8
http://3ilte6sqgfknw5el.onion,A hidden service 9
http://c3ntz6fyiegn7vrr.onion,A hidden service 10
http://copafexyhkealvd7.onion,A hidden service 11
http://c65mcoididjlt3zo.onion,A hidden service 12
http://c65mcoididjlt3zo.onion/pdf,A hidden service 12
http://oqkjkwogf6dljog6.onion,A hidden service 13
http://qa3erjokmgul5srv.onion,A hidden service 14
http://jzu5lybd7mmv5j3o.onion,A hidden service 15
http://b64esyl3gtpcevpe.onion,A hidden service 16
http://4ewrwhxoviconusl.onion,A hidden service 17
http://gt6k73wri5ef4s5a.onion,A hidden service 18
http://osejnyaebjsxojln.onion,A hidden service 19
http://7pvduwihntpla7yi.onion,A hidden service 20
http://yo4br4xqnnm3uc5i.onion,A hidden service 21
http://hgyamsjnvzpmdcfa.onion,A hidden service 22
http://v2hfivqd6hct4p6d.onion,A hidden service 23
http://dkkuvairvnab3utz.onion,A hidden service 24
http://b6ci4n33iwqcpmwy.onion,A hidden service 25
http://n5nsovqforz2wkqd.onion,A hidden service 26
http://ycbyqp3swnbakcay.onion,A hidden service 27
http://74t3ljtwb6qgrhth.onion,A hidden service 28
http://ivq7q7pfpwzfnpoa.onion,A hidden service 29
http://gekejzxwt6uqlboa.onion,A hidden service 30
http://jbfkuizu67tzrqkf.onion,A hidden service 31
http://bdpuqvsqmphctrcs.onion/socks5.html,SOCKS Serers in the world
http://ohvwhtx7hveww23x.onion,A hidden service 32
http://bdpuqvsqmphctrcs.onion,Yet another Tor Directory
http://bm26rwk32m7u7rec.onion,The Majestic Garden
http://cthulhuuap7ch47k.onion,The Cthulu Resume
http://sinbox4irsyaauzo.onion,Sinbox
http://2zcjxgh6xq4o3uvl.onion,Blog de Jeremy Visser
http://2zfg3roohcxbm22l.onion,Le Tesseract
http://33pvcdba2nm3afnj.onion,m5sleaks
http://344c6kbnjnljjzlz.onion,VFEmail
http://3dboyshc32kjbfz6.onion,3dboys
http://3kyl4i7bfdgwelmf.onion,We fight censorship
http://3mlmu74h2h6itqho.onion,Games
http://3mrdrr2gas45q6hp.onion,Torducking
http://3c3rn3dyakxyvhaw.onion,Sipuliwiki
http://47u4h3qi2sdetpgx.onion,Hinezumi
http://5hwfjyqccadwzcvb.onion,Lavado de bitcoins
http://5nklpqfgczvtjrlg.onion,Jiskopedia
http://5r4bjnjug3apqdii.onion,IRPI Leaks
http://5uainfj3jaiys3tk.onion,AnonOPS 1984
http://5zkfuvtrpotg2nzd.onion,Executive Outcomes
http://6rf4j27gnmfqf4jk.onion,Zyclonite
http://7hk64iz2vn2ewi7h.onion,Blog about stories
http://7kvucw3xaostxoan.onion/omega,Omega search
http://7iaedcsvdqircbbq.onion,Intrepid Crossing
http://7ueo7ahq2xlpwx7q.onion,AYPSELA News
http://7zzohostingx4mes.onion,onion hosting Provider
http://abbujjh5vqtq77wg.onion,Onion Identity Services
http://ak2uqfavwgmjrvtu.onion,GlobaLeaks
http://mjt54q6pagohhimn.onion,Porn Videos
http://ejz7kqoryhqwosbk.onion,Bittit Sell pictures
http://avhazx3mvpdhsd3x.onion,NewZnab
http://b3xvn4buhglvv5j7.onion,Stream I2P
http://babylonxjrtdyomy.onion,Babylon Escrow service
http://bdpuqvsqmphctrcs.onion/tormap2.html,TOR Map
http://bj37gkglnthkmm4l.onion,XPIDER
http://bl3j73taluhwidx5.onion,Pandora OpenMarket
http://buycigs6r6ataxkh.onion,Cigarettes store
http://bx7zrcsebkma7ids.onion,Public notes
http://bwbvcvmbpnan6xsd.onion,Shadow Life
http://catmeow2zuqpkpyw.onion,CryptoCat
http://carding2bil6j7ja.onion,Tor Carders Market
http://ccxall7zz227sv22.onion,CC X ALL
http://crdp2qimaec2es3x.onion,GSF System
http://crypty22ijtotell.onion,CryptoParty
http://cstoreav7i44h2lr.onion,Carding CSTORE
http://czlmwxv4sudftz55.onion,Dutchy Anonymous DrugStore
http://cyruservvvklto2l.onion,Cyruserv Hosting
http://d72dm3s2ushqmsmg.onion,Babilonia
http://directory4iisquf.onion,All Markets vendor directory
http://thundersplv36ecb.onion,Thunders Place
http://dmru36nvfgtywx47.onion,HomeHosting
http://do7dt6vuskgrz3sa.onion,Buy anabolic Steroids
http://drugs6atkjvtk64f.onion,Pablo Escobar DrugStore
http://en35tuzqmn4lofbk.onion,USFakeIDS
http://escrowdhfaemebkt.onion,TOREscrow
http://exposed36mq3ns23.onion,Exposed secret files
http://fairnewsfesuehoh.onion,Access TOR Usenet for all
http://fakeidscpc4zz6c4.onion,FakeID
http://fkyvwpu7ccsorke2.onion,Books no reason
http://fhynv2xw7wbtfj3u.onion,Portal Cyberia
http://futz4b7tmqzoxnc6.onion,Anoncoin
http://freebbs4fghuteja.onion,FreeBBS
http://fudkjb2tonsizx7c.onion,Music Lists
http://gjepux4a5hcrwczm.onion,Free as in Freedom
http://hardblush4fncbgz.onion,Hardblush artwork
http://xcomics5vvoiary2.onion,XComics
http://xnordic6virmmls3.onion,X Nordic Scandinavian
http://hackpdatf4kryh54.onion,Anonymous OpObscurity
http://hiddenblcjdoakxx.onion,The hidden Market
http://hiotuxliwisbp6mi.onion,Anarch Documents
http://hlofftnkkom7l2t4.onion,Sergii
http://iir4yomndw2dec7x.onion,OnionMail
http://infnet7z5rpm7lyr.onion,Infernet DarkHosting
http://infotombjhy7tcrg.onion,InfoTomb Share files
http://jgx2azthbvyy2hgs.onion,the one-stop tools site for banking techies
http://jlve2y45zacpbz6s.onion,TOR Status
http://jqiho7je6xty4ne4.onion,Outils de coordination contre toutes les formes de repression
http://jwgkxry7xjeaeg5d.onion,WikiLeaks
http://xxxxxxxxxxh5kyrx.onion,Whonix Operative System
http://konkretzdxpqygow.onion,Konkret
http://lelantoss7bcnwbv.onion,Lelantos
http://lcvkso2t5t3cmy3x.onion,HackCanada
http://li7nznb2rmr3xxok.onion,Zoom Search Engine
http://lnvmtlvb552gdroq.onion,Antagonism.org
http://loow5bjd6qjbwi5z.onion,BMRv3 Visor Feedback
http://louhlbgyupgktsw7.onion,OnionMail
http://ltxocqh4nvwkofil.onion,Dream Market
http://ma6vkbfvzoptuuwy.onion,DeepGame Station
http://maftrgyygtmygbfv.onion,Router Tor
http://mail2tor2zyjdctd.onion,Mail2TOR
http://mbiaswyv3if5pm6f.onion,MedicanBias
http://mc455ulww46uxhaj.onion,CardSharing Service
http://mhsaby5zjddolddv.onion,OnionTrade
http://blbrasil4q6blzyx.onion,BoyLove Brasil
http://mixjuia5jwfchmnd.onion,BTCMix Bitcoin Laundry
http://mqdveflunplrw4pc.onion,ReMood Forum
http://greendrgfjz7ks5f.onion,Green Dragon
http://mshrmsm3thypfigq.onion,Magic Mushrooms
http://nope7beergoa64ih.onion,BB Compendium Drugs Explosives Fireworks etc
http://nnpbetabzsneptym.onion,Newznab
http://nk3k2rsitogzvk2a.onion,Onion Uploader
http://nfokjgfj3hxs4nwu.onion,Hidden Service basic configuration
http://neyigf7eragkp5nq.onion,Youth rage
http://ytragesvng2p4c5v.onion,Youth rage Alternative
http://nawuflr2lvz6sg7w.onion,Tor Bullion
http://lyp6sf5tzd6mbnmc.onion,Overchan
http://fdwocbsnity6vzwd.onion,French Deep web
http://obbmvdfeecvg2mxp.onion,Science Germany
http://ocu3errhpxppmwpr.onion,AnonGTS
http://olbug5p4552sw3mw.onion,Datos servicio secreto finlandes
http://odduuqnxvzqftyfh.onion,The secret story archive
http://pasteyyyr65wm6fm.onion,decentralized pastebin
http://onionuptst6up7n2.onion,OnionUp
http://penisycpu3fixdcr.onion,OnionSphere
http://pmwdzvbyvnmwobk5.onion,HackerSpace Prague
http://popfilesxuru7lsr.onion,PopFiles
http://psyco42coib33wfl.onion,Ukranian Community
http://qbikfpcr4mhqoumm.onion,StolenPal
http://qd73mvvc7v7zewwl.onion,Cebulka
http://qgmjr5tj6mokd6ma.onion,The Matrix Galery
http://qm3monarchzifkwa.onion,Deep web brasil BBS
http://qtt2yl5jocgrk7nu.onion,SKS OpenPGP Public Key Server
http://ramp2bombkadwvgz.onion,Russian Anonymous Marketplace
http://silkroad6ownowfk.onion,Silkroad
http://silkroad5v7dywlc.onion,Silkroad Forums
http://silkkitiehdg5mug.onion,Silkkitie
http://shopsat2dotfotbs.onion,TorShops
http://satforumnoo6sxgk.onion,Sat forum
http://s7kgnncq3zbe3yza.onion,Onion Soup
http://sinbox4irsyaauzo.onion,Sinbox
http://skunksworkedp2cg.onion,Harry71
http://sla2tcypjz774dno.onion,Unified USD Counterfeit
http://supportpdsv7ydm5.onion,Pedo Support
http://timaq4ygg2iegci7.onion,TxTorCon
http://tigas3l7uusztiqu.onion,Mike Tigas
http://theches3nacocgsc.onion,The Chess
http://teir4baj5mpvkg5n.onion,Fund The Islamic Struggle Without Leaving a Trace
http://szn36kdviplw3awz.onion,FTP FILE TRANSFER VIA TOR PROXY
http://syndielzlvbxdsah.onion,Syndie distributed forums
http://gcvqzacplu4veul4.onion,Coinkite Bitcoin Wallet
http://blakbdkibaulz2c3.onion,Black and Yellow
http://kowloon5aibdbege.onion,Onion Hosting
http://lb5vnwyafrlxgmlt.onion,Directory Tree
http://pfoxkj3p65uyc5pe.onion,Onion Bookmarks
http://hhokbk2kujwujm3w.onion,Dark Scandals
http://lsfind245crtxod5.onion,LS Finder
http://qvchmzewlf4efhcw.onion,Nudist Paradise
http://cdidx2de3mgpvzdl.onion,IndexHeaven
http://boyvidsforfk6sw5.onion,BoyVids form.
http://uizxxzdowrh6rrys.onion,PremiumTor
http://usjudr3c6ez6tesi.onion,USJUD
http://uuzvlv6hayzquoon.onion,HackBraten
http://twulujga5k2t3i6c.onion,Blue Cabinet
http://tr36btffdmdmavbi.onion,CC Planet Fullz
http://torwikignoueupfm.onion,TorWiki
http://torvps7kzis5ujfz.onion,TorVPS
http://vur2ear4amgyacaf.onion,Escrow and laundry bitcoin services
http://vx3w763ohd256iyh.onion,Silkroad we rise again
http://vysoofjtouvo2bl3.onion,NewsBlur
http://wbyi72yt6gitdcqd.onion,NewsFileSearch
http://wdnqg3ehh3hvalpe.onion,Keys open doors
http://wikitjerrta4qgz4.onion,The Hidden Wiki
http://wntxyw6zdeos7ag6.onion,Death Man Zero
http://wtwfzc6ty2s6x4po.onion,Sea Kitten Palace
http://x5yd2gfthlfgdqjg.onion,CGIProxy
http://xmctuxj7dsymumwf.onion,Auditbook Vault
http://xtyazgdnzt6acu3g.onion,Hardware-enhanced Security
http://yz6yiv2hxyagvwy6.onion,Rowio
http://yoewa2oiuuducqb5.onion,One Time Dead Drop
http://ykrxnmvcmozu5maa.onion,MOM4Europe
http://deepwikizpkrt67e.onion,The Hidden Wiki
http://auutwvpt2zktxwng.onion,New TOR Directory
http://chippyits5cqbd7p.onion,Hack The Planet
http://braveb6xgkctts5l.onion,Brave Bunny
http://grams7enufi7jmdl.onion,Grams Search
http://ndj6p3asftxboa7j.onion,TorFind
http://3ayspace4uiyivsz.onion,Spaceforall
http://wztyb7vlfcw6l4xd.onion,BlackBank Market
http://wes3gz7f6v3ko5o7.onion,FastCards
http://wikitor74em2u6rq.onion,WikiTor
http://vw5bzgplges2xlej.onion,OK Cards
http://ujompjlrdgbhkmuj.onion,Real Cards Team
http://turkxg24knjsfj6j.onion,Turkish deep web
http://jppcxclcwvkbh3xi.onion,BlackMarket Data Board Info
http://ttpsva5qvzg7hj66.onion,Card Dumps Shop
http://tsbcgojdzbrkdho2.onion,ByteBX
http://torservsbt7rsbfg.onion,TorServ Onion Hosting
http://thehub7dnl5nmcz5.onion,The Hub Forums
http://torbinhrgtk6t7rz.onion,TorBin Encrypted hidden pastebin
http://thehivemwon6a5mp.onion,TheHive
http://nifgk5szbodg7qbo.onion,TorCarding Forums
http://mv5cb4hz3ecscshx.onion,Paypal Center
http://mediacrs5ujufxog.onion,Media Crush
http://m2cylfgiecnncc6f.onion,Bitcoin Mixer
http://lmyv5msldzlcp224.onion,Euro and USD Counterfeits
http://lacbzxobeprssrfx.onion,Agora Forum
http://igvmwp3544wpnd6u.onion,Fake Real Plastic
http://ic6au7wa3f6naxjq.onion,GNUPG
http://hydrafmchvpq5yc6.onion,Hydra Forums
http://hosting6iar5zo7c.onion,Real Hosting Onion Hosting
http://hcutffvavocsh6nd.onion,The Cash Machine
http://freetrade62xi56q.onion,Deepweb Markets
http://freepress3xxs3hk.onion,Freedom of Press
http://fqyfryfq2iznzsob.onion,Darknet Feedback database
http://dgoega4kbhnp53o7.onion,BlackMarket
http://databinhwin4xuxx.onion,Databin
http://chatrapi7fkbzczr.onion,OnionChat
http://boostfqofcqw2jra.onion,BitCoin Boost
http://bviaqyj6obc54vhn.onion,Cloud Nine
http://bitblendervrfkzr.onion,Bitcoin Blender
http://67yjqewxrd2ewbtp.onion,GreenNotes Counter
http://54ogum7gwxhtgiya.onion,Dimension X
http://xn2i5i64krr4ezas.onion,Deeptube videos